
Room-0
NASA Video: Room0-video-NASA's Research on Climate Change - Above and Beyond

Before knowing all about the Earth's Climate History, take a look at the world's climate, visiting places through this very interactive poster.
Interactive poster, https://www.strategies.org/interactive/   (imp)


AUDIO- End Room 0 (with room_0_bg images)
Excerpt Earth's Climatic Evolution

The earliest Earth did not have an atmosphere or free water. The planet was far too hot for gases and water to collect. 
Earth’s first atmosphere was different from the current one. The atmosphere and oceans that we see today evolved over time. 
The gases came from volcanic eruptions and from comets. Volcanoes spewed gases into the air. Comets carried in ices from outer space. These ices warmed and became gases. Nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and water vapor, 
or water in gas form, were in the first atmosphere . The early atmosphere had almost no oxygen.
Eventually plants evolved. Plants produce oxygen as a product of photosynthesis. Oxygen spread around the planet about 2.5 billion
 years ago. Many organisms died off because they could not handle the oxygen. But this development was extremely important for other life. 
Animals need oxygen to breathe. If photosynthesis had not evolved there would be no animals. Without oxygen, life on Earth would not have been possible.


Enter Room-1

Let us take a look at the complete history of Earth's Atmosphere


im 1)The Earliest Atmosphere
(4.6 billion years ago)
When Earth formed 4.6 billion years ago from a hot mix of gases and solids, it had almost no atmosphere. The surface was molten. As Earth cooled, an atmosphere formed mainly from gases spewed from volcanoes. It included hydrogen sulfide, methane, and ten to 200 times as much carbon dioxide as today’s atmosphere. After about half a billion years, Earth’s surface cooled and solidified enough for water to collect on it.
 

im 2)The Archean Eon (4 to 2.5 billion years ago)
During the Archean Eon, methane droplets in the air shrouded the young Earth in a global haze. There was no oxygen gas on Earth. Oxygen was only in compounds such as water. Complex chemical reactions in the young oceans transformed carbon-containing molecules into simple, living cells that did not need oxygen to live. Instead they made energy out of sulfur and other elements.

2.7 billion years ago, bluish-green microscopic organisms called cyanobacteria flourished in Earth’s oceans. They made gaseous, or free, oxygen from carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight—the process called photosynthesis. As cyanobacteria created more free oxygen, the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere reached one percent of today’s level, which is 21 percent
 

im 3)Life and Earth’s atmosphere evolved together. Over time, tiny photosynthetic organisms produced enough oxygen to react with the methane in the atmosphere, transforming it forever. About two billion years ago, the methane haze cleared and the sky turned blue.

After photosynthetic bacteria had been making oxygen for about 300 million years, enough oxygen built up in the atmosphere to oxidize (combine with) the iron in rocks and soil to make reddish iron oxide and create vast expanses of redbeds. Scientists study redbeds to learn more about Earth’s early atmosphere.

 
im 4) Oxygen Boom!
Between 700-550 million years ago, in the late Proterozoic, oxygen levels in the oceans and atmosphere increased dramatically. By 600 million years ago, the oxygen in the atmosphere reached about one-fifth of today’s level (21 percent). The oxygen boom favored the evolution of lifeforms that could use oxygen to create energy. For other organisms, oxygen was poisonous, and they were forced into extreme airless habitats or into extinction. Some scientists say that the increase in oxygen helped fuel the burst of sea life known as the Cambrian explosion, 530 to 509 million years ago, including the evolution of eurypterids and trilobites.

Until about 430 million years ago, most aerobic organisms lived in the ocean and used oxygen dissolved in seawater. Then about 430 million years ago, life on land appeared. Small plants and invertebrates (animals without backbones) evolved the ability to live on land and use oxygen directly from the atmosphere. During the Devonian Period, 416-397 million years ago, plants evolved, as did the first four-footed animals.

 
im 5)The Age of Oxygen (400 million to 290 million years ago)
As plants became firmly established on land, life once again had a major effect on Earth’s atmosphere during the Carboniferous Period. Oxygen made up 20 percent of the atmosphere—about today’s level—around 350 million years ago, and it rose to as much as 35 percent over the next 50 million years.
 

im 6) Modern Atmospheres (290 million years ago to now)
During most of the past 290 million years, Earth was much warmer than it is now. Scientists understand that changes in the atmosphere affect Earth’s climate. Between 200 and 45 million years ago polar ice caps were small or absent, and winters were warmer around the globe. In these warm climates, many types of plants and animals lived in the polar regions.

 
Room-2

First Wall- Video

Next walls:

atm1
Earth’s original atmosphere was probably just hydrogen and helium, because these were the main gases in the dusty, 
gassy disk around the Sun from which the planets formed. The Earth and its atmosphere were very hot. Molecules of 
hydrogen and helium move really fast, especially when warm. Actually, they moved so fast they eventually all escaped 
Earth's gravity and drifted off into space.


atm2
Earth’s “second atmosphere” came from Earth itself. There were lots of volcanoes, many more than today, because Earth’s 
crust was still forming. The volcanoes released
steam (H2O, with two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom),
carbon dioxide (CO2, with one carbon atoms and two oxygen atoms),
ammonia (NH3, with one nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms).


atm3
Much of the CO2 dissolved into the oceans. Eventually, a simple form of bacteria developed that could live on energy from the 
Sun and carbon dioxide in the water, producing oxygen as a waste product. Thus, oxygen began to build up in the atmosphere, while
 the carbon dioxide levels continued to drop. Meanwhile, the ammonia molecules in the atmosphere were broken apart by sunlight, leaving
 nitrogen and hydrogen. The hydrogen, being the lightest element, rose to the top of the atmosphere and much of it eventually drifted off into space.

atm4
Presently, we have Earth’s “third atmosphere,” the one we all know and love—an atmosphere for animals, including ourselves, to survive and evolve.  
As you can see, air is mostly nitrogen (78%), with oxygen a distant runner up (21%). Argon and some other gases make up another small amount (about 1%). 
And carbon dioxide is only a very tiny slice (.0385% or only about 385 parts per million parts of air).


room2- end/ last wall Video
